>>WILLIAM HENRY:
It is considered
the most mysterious relic
of all human history,
but is it a relic, or
is it something else?
>>CLARE HENRY:
Next on "Arcanum:"
the secrets of the
Shroud of Turin.
>>WILLIAM: The Shroud of
Turin is a large, linen cloth
imbued with the image of
a tortured, crucified man.
>>CLARE: The question of
whether the Shroud of Turin
in is the actual burial cloth
of Jesus is open, unanswered.
>>WILLIAM: Christian
belief says something
of extraordinary significance
happened in a tomb
just over 2000 years ago.
This cloth was thought
to have been present.
>>CLARE: It is considered the
most important and most studied
relic of Christianity.
>>WILLIAM: In year 2000,
Cardinal Ratzinger,
later to be known as
Pope Benedict XVI,
wrote that the Shroud of Turin
is a truly mysterious image,
which no human artistry
was capable of producing.
In some inexplicable way, it
appeared imprinted upon cloth
and believed to show
the true face of Christ,
the crucified and risen Lord.
>>CLARE: The shroud profoundly
challenges and confounds
human intellect.
Science has tried
to explain it, but
no universally accepted process
has being proposed to do so.
The image on the shroud defies
duplication by human hands.
>>WILLIAM: In June,
2008, three years
after he assumed the
papcy, Pope Benedict
announced that the shroud
would be publicly displayed
in the spring of
2010, and stated
that he would like to go
to Turin to see it along
with other pilgrims.
>>CLARE: During his visit
in Turin on Sunday, May
the second, 2010 Pope Benedict
described the Shroud of Turin
as an extraordinary icon--
the icon of holy Saturday,
corresponding in every way
to what the Gospels tell us
of Jesus-- an icon written
in blood, the blood of a man
who was scourged, crowned
with thorns, crucified,
and whose right
side was pierced.
>>WILLIAM: The pope said also
that in the Turin shroud,
we see as in a
mirror our suffering
in the suffering of Christ.
>>CLARE: Three years later,
on the 30th of March,
2013 as part of the
Easter celebrations,
there was an
extraordinary exposition
of the shroud in the
Cathedral of Turin.
>>WILLIAM: In a
carefully worded message,
Pope Francis asked and answered
a rhetorical question--
how is it that the
faithful, like you, pause
before this icon of a man
scourged and crucified?
It is because the
man of the shroud
invites us to contemplate
Jesus of Nazareth.
>>CLARE: Pope Francis
recorded a video message
for the occasion, in
which he described
the image on the shroud
as this icon of a man,
and stated the man
of the shroud invites
us to contemplate
Jesus of Nazareth.
>>WILLIAM: He continued
saying, "So looking
upon the man of the shroud, I
make Saint Francis of Assisi's
prayer before the
crucifix my own.
Most high and glorious
God, enlighten the darkness
of my heart, and grant me
true faith, certain hope,
and perfect charity,
sense, and understanding,
Lord, so that I may carry out
your holy and true command."
>>CLARE: Pope Francis and his
predecessor Pope Benedict XVI
have both described the
Shroud of Turin as an icon.
In choosing this carefully
worded description,
we realize the
popes are telling us
something astounding
about the shroud.
>>WILLIAM: The Shroud
of Turin is not a relic.
It's an icon, and there's
a huge difference.
In fact, the shroud
may be the first icon.
In our episode on
the transfiguration,
we decoded this term.
>>CLARE: In William's
feature investigation,
he will help us gaze beyond the
surface of the Shroud of Turin,
the first icon.
>>WILLIAM: For millions of
Christians, the Shroud of Turin
is a symbol for the hope for the
afterlife and life after death.
But could it be more
than just a symbol?
Could it be an actual tool
that assists believers
in their journey
to resurrection?
Is this why, in his carefully
worded message about the Shroud
of Turin, Pope Francis
asked and answered
that kind of odd
rhetorical question,
how is it that the
faithful, like you, pause
before this icon of a man
scourged and crucified?
Is it because the
man of the shroud
invites us to contemplate
Jesus of Nazareth?
In Christianity, an
icon is a sacred image
that is believed to be
charged with spiritual power.
They also believe it can
transmit this spiritual power.
In Christian art, an
icon is a living image
that functions as a
portal or a gateway.
It's literally considered to be
a two-way mirror, and a method
of communication with
the divine realms.
Icons were specially created
to enable a visceral encounter
with a holy being, or to make
present a spiritual energy.
They are a form
of visual alchemy
that can help us in our
own transfiguration,
if that's our path.
They were specially created to
enable this visceral encounter
with a holy being, or to
make that spiritual energy
present in our bodies.
Thus, they are
this visual alchemy
that can assist us in
our transformation.
The amazing account
of the transformation,
or transfiguration of Jesus
from the book of Matthew
says that after six days, Jesus
took with him Peter, James,
and John the brother of
James, and led them up
a high mountain by themselves.
There, he was
transfigured before them.
Jesus' face shone like
the Sun, and his clothes
became as white as light.
Just then, there appeared
before them Moses and Elijah,
talking with Jesus.
For the icon makers of
the transfiguration icons,
these images became a
channel between two worlds.
To an orthodox Christian, the
images are more than that.
They are a medium through which
the whole may be approached,
and grace channeled,
like a two-way mirror.
In the magical alchemical
imagination of the icon makers,
these images were designed to be
actual doors to another world.
Our world and the spiritual
world are open to each other
through the icon.
And this is why
it's so important
to make the distinction
in the Pope's
terminology between the
shroud being a relic
and the shroud being an icon.
The icon makers held that
through prayer and meditation,
believers could actually come
to perceive the same divine
light that shone around Jesus
during his transfiguration.
Through contemplation,
meditation, and reflection
on the icon, we begin to
reflect the light experienced
by Jesus in our lives.
By mirroring Christ, the
transfiguration icon makers
proposed, we can put on
our own cloak of light,
our garment of light, our robe
of light, or shining garment,
as the light body is called.
In addition to calling
the Shroud of Turin
an icon-- again, not
a relic-- Pope Francis
said that in the shroud,
we see as in a mirror
our suffering in the
suffering of Christ.
Francis is clearly
speaking the language
of the icon makers,
the language of those
who know the secrets
of this visual alchemy.
And he's one step
away from telling us
that we can actually use the
Shroud of Turin as a mirror
in order to assist us in
our own transfiguration.
This is more than
poetic language.
The Pope, Francis,
is telling us,
in my view, that the shroud
is in fact a two-way mirror
and a method of communication
with the divine realm,
specifically with
the light of Christ.
So is this icon literally,
literally a portal or conduit
to another world?
Did Jesus leave this as
a message of healing?
Did he leave this icon as
a way to connect with him,
to open a portal to
the divine realm?
Is the material world
and the spiritual world
open to each other through the
Christ icon or the shroud icon?
Just how far can
we stretch this?
In his book "The Sign,"
British art historian Thomas de
Wesselow has proposed a theory
that the shroud contains
the living light of
Christ, literally.
He says that this
light was captured
by the material of the shroud.
In fact, he cites
a Chinese ceremony
which involved enticing
into a sick man's coat
the departing spirit, which
has already left his body.
Wesselow proposes that when Mary
Magdalene saw the resurrected
Jesus on Easter morning,
that what she actually saw
was the Shroud of Turin with the
man of light imprinted upon it.
Analogously, the
shroud could have
been seen as a coat,
de Wesselow notes,
in which Jesus' spirit
has been caught.
Now, this is very interesting,
because this view is in harmony
with the view expressed in
several episodes of "Arcanum."
That is, the ancient
purveyors of arcanum
utilized the symbol
of a robe or coat
as a metaphor for the craft
of human transformation
into light.
In our episode on
ascension thrones,
we noted that Elias, the
messiah's forerunner,
is a man to whom many great
mysteries are attached,
especially those concerning
a transmittable cloak, coat,
or garment.
According to the Book of
Kings, he raised the dead,
brought fire down
from the sky, and was
taken up in a whirlwind,
either accompanied
by a chariot of horses of flame,
or riding in this chariot.
And it is clear that Elijah
knew the secret of arcanum.
Elijah possessed
ancient keys that
allowed him to be
transported from one location
to another, to raise the
dead, to command rain,
and even to baffle
world leaders.
Importantly, as Elijah ascended
in his Merkaba whirlwind,
he did so in a form other than
as a flesh and blood human.
He appears to have
adopted a body that
could bend space
and time, and also
to dematerialize
and rematerialize
at another location
or frequency.
This teaching is also found
in the Tibetan rainbow body
tradition.
This special ability
is transmittable
and is symbolized by Elijah's
pala garment, or power garment,
which he transmitted
to his priest Elisha
as he rose into the heavens.
In Christian tradition,
Elijah reincarnated
as John the Baptist.
And as shown in this mosaic in
San Marco in Florence, Italy,
Elijah reacquired
this power cloak,
and then transmitted it to his
cousin Jesus at the baptism.
In this 12th century image
from Winchester, England,
an angel stands beside Jesus
to give him this power cloak,
and by extension, its abilities.
Jesus then demonstrated his
knowledge of this power garment
or cloak at the transfiguration,
during which his body shone
like the Sun.
Jesus' ultimate
expression of this arcanum
was demonstrated at his
resurrection, in which Jesus
turned to light, and then
manifested to his disciples
as an extraordinary light being.
Matthias Grunewald has
captured this moment
in a powerful and
triumphant way.
Andrea Mantegna's illumination
of Jesus' transformation
into light is equally stunning.
He shows Jesus in
a radiant fire,
enfolded by luminous angels.
Jesus gives the blessing signal.
Millions believe
the Shroud of Turin
is a record of
Jesus' resurrection.
But what if, as the popes
proclaim, it is an icon?
And what if, as an icon, it
is capable of transmitting
the secrets of resurrection,
just like Elijah transmitted
the secrets to his priest?
It is astounding to think
that Secondo Pia's 1898
negative of this image is
a view of the Shroud made
possible only by the
invention of photography
in the late 19th century.
The image appears
far more coherent
than it does when
seen in positive.
And it was by accident that
Secondo Pia unwittingly
revealed the face and body
on the Shroud of Turin.
No one knew yet
that the clearer,
reverse image existed
on the Shroud,
for the faint face image on
the Shroud cannot be clearly
observed, or even recognized,
with the naked eye.
Pia later said that he
almost dropped and broke
the photographic plate in the
darkroom from the shock of what
appeared on it.
Can you imagine?
The reverse plate showed the
image of a man and a face
that could not be seen
with the naked eye.
To this day, the
enigma of the origin
of the body image of
the Shroud of Turin
is a challenge to
our intelligence
and to our science.
Experts are in agreement that
the image on the linen shroud
is not made up of any physical
substance such as paint
or pigment.
This means it's
not a photograph.
It is, in fact, an
alteration of the surface
of the linen by some effect
of light or radiation,
something which also
makes linen turn yellow.
The light energy was able to
image the body and surrounding
objects, including the
markings on the tops
of the coins placed
on the eyes of Jesus.
For this to occur,
the imaging light
must have surrounded
the body, suggesting
the body was the
source of the light.
It also means the
light was uniform.
Scientists from
Italy's National Agency
for New Technologies, Energy
and Sustainable Economic
Development spent years trying
to replicate the shroud's
markings.
These markings show a body
that endured extreme torture,
followed by crucifixion.
In December, 2011,
these scientists
announced that the
Turin shroud was created
by a flash of
supernatural light,
and it couldn't be
a medieval forgery,
as many had come to believe.
They have concluded
only something
akin to ultraviolet lasers,
far beyond the capability
of medieval forgers,
could have created
the image on the shroud.
This has led to
fresh suggestions
that the imprint
was indeed created
by a huge burst of
energy accompanying
the resurrection of Christ.
Could a momentary burst of
radiant energy and E equals Mc
squared transfiguration
account for these properties?
If the Shroud of
Turin was indeed
created by the same
phenomenon that allowed Jesus
to glow brighter than the Sun in
front of James, Peter, and John
at the transfiguration, then
the extraordinary features
that this cloth has
been found to possess
could have a
clearer explanation.
The prophet Daniel
had prophesied
about the risen dead
shining like the stars.
Did Jesus fulfill this prophecy
by transforming himself
into a celestial or star being?
Is the Shroud of
Turin calling us
to follow Jesus in
this transformation,
and join him in the stars?
As we have explored in
other episodes of "Arcanum,"
I have established myself as
one of the leading researchers
in the belief that the
resurrection of Jesus
represented his demonstration
of what the Tibetans call
the rainbow body of light.
Rainbow body practitioners
can dissolve the human body
into a vortex of energy
that ultimately manifests
as five-color rainbow light,
leaving behind only hair, toe-
and fingernails that have
no nerves to be transmuted.
This is the rainbow surrounding
Jesus in Christian resurrection
art.
He has attained
the rainbow body.
And Tibetans actually
teach that icons
can transmit the vibration
of the rainbow body.
In fact, the rainbow body
is taught via images.
So was it the particles
radiating from the rainbow body
of Jesus that marked the
images on the shroud?
Is the Shroud of Turin a
record of Jesus' attainment
of the rainbow body?
Is it, once again,
an icon capable of
transmitting the secrets or
vibration of the resurrection,
or rainbow body of light?
Is it the ultimate icon?
And is that what these
visionary artists
have attempted to communicate
in their paintings
based on the shroud?
If the Shroud of
Turin is an icon,
then it is by definition a
channel of spiritual energy.
It is by definition a
portal to another reality,
and the idea that Christ can
speak through an image or icon
is actually well-documented
in Christian history.
In fact, de Wesselow cites
an extraordinary experience
of Saint Francis of
Assisi, who is shown here
radiating the holy light.
An image of Christ and the
crucifix at San Damiano
miraculously spoke
to Saint Francis,
saying, "Go repair my
church, which, as you see,
is falling completely in ruin."
Above Jesus' head is a
portrayal of the ascension.
We see Christ emerging
from a red circle,
holding a golden cross
which is now his scepter,
the symbol of arcanum.
There are other
powerful examples
of Christ speaking
or transmitting
a work of art or an image.
Shown here is an image
of the Arma Christi,
the instruments of the Passion,
from a 14th-century book
shelved in the Royal Collection
of the British Library.
It's divided into a series of
38 compartments, each of which
depicts images of the
instruments of the Passion,
or some other object or event
emblematic of the Passion--
the hammer, the cock
that crew three times,
the dice, the pelican, the wound
in Christ's side, and so forth.
The text declares that
whoever recites the prayer,
"Ave facies
praeclara," and looks
at the image with devotion,
will receive an indulgence
of three years, and may
experience a beatific vision
of Christ, in which the glory
pours upon the meditator.
This image represents
this beatific vision.
A giant face of the deity
is surrounded by flames,
in rays of gold, silver,
and orange, and white
against a blue background
bordered with clouds.
Angels are to be seen
through the rays.
And on the top left,
the angel holds up
the naked soul of
a mitered bishop.
The rays beam down into
the second and third zones.
And in the second, an abbott,
Saint Bernard, points down,
and Saint Paul holds
his hands raised.
In the third zone, a
man and woman kneel
on either side of a sphere of
the universe, with the Earth
at the center, and the fall
of man represented therein.
Then there's the experience
of Saint Theresa of Avila,
who received the stigmata
marks, the wounds
of the crucified Jesus, from an
image of Christ on the cross.
As seen in this
painting by Manetti,
Christ beams the stigmata
from this painting
to Theresa via rays of light.
These accounts affirm
that it is indeed
possible for icons or images
to transmit the energies
or vibrations of the
crucified Christ, and indeed
the resurrected Christ.
If one views the Shroud
of Turin as an icon,
as the popes are now doing,
that can link us to Christ,
and even can open a portal
or gateway to other realms,
then it certainly
would behoove one
to get as close to
this icon as possible.
Claire will tell the story
of our personal encounter
with the Shroud of Turin in
her Beyond the Veil segment.
But before that, we
must pause to consider
the question of how a human
body can turn to flame,
or holy light, and momentarily
shine brighter than the Sun.
A provocative answer is
provided by Dame Isabel Piczek,
a Hungarian-born particle
physicist and internationally
renowned monumental artist.
In 2004, Dame Piczek
became fascinated
by a mysterious property of
the shroud that is impossible,
yet actually is
evidenced by this cloth.
That is, the muscles
of the body are not
crunched against the
stone of the tomb.
They're perfect.
This means the body was
levitating, hovering,
or floating between the
two sides of the Shroud.
As Piczek says,
this means there's
no gravity involved here.
In addition, Piczek
observed that the image
is distortion free.
This is impossible if the
shroud was wrapped, draped,
or otherwise placed on the body.
It is only possible if the
shroud was absolutely taut,
stretched like a paint
canvas on a frame.
Piczek's work strongly suggests
that the image of Jesus
was projected as a quantum
hologram on the cloth.
She says the entire
resurrection process
is akin to the Big Bang creation
of the universe, when something
was created from nothing.
You can read the
science of the shroud,
such as the total lack of
gravity, lack of entropy
without gravitational collapse,
no time, no space-- it conforms
to no known law of physics.
And according to the nature of
the event horizon, says Piczek,
the dead body must
have left its image
on the two surfaces
of the event horizons.
At the time of the explosion
of the event horizons,
these images were ejected
onto both sides of the shroud,
with the body hovering
parallel to the event horizons.
This explains why the
image shows a dead man, not
the risen body.
It also explains why
the image is negative.
It went from a positive body
image to the negative image,
like a camera film negative.
This indicates how the
image got onto the cloth.
To Piczek, the shroud symbolizes
life, or victory over death.
It does not signify
the end of Jesus' life.
Rather, it is an
unbelievable beginning
of his new life because of the
depth of the collapsed event
horizon.
There is the
singularity, she says.
This is what physicist proposed
happened at the Big Bang.
And she says that
we have nothing
less in the tomb of
Christ that the beginning
of a new universe.
In his article that lays out
his considered reflections
on the question of how a man
can shine brighter than the Sun,
Doctor Andrew Silverman
begins with the evidence
that thought, light, and
matter are interrelated.
It is further suggested that
the nature of this relation
implies that our
corporeal state is
a symptom of the
restriction of mind.
And inference, says
Silverman, derives
from this that simply undoing
these restrictions has
the power to release the tension
of space, which we call matter,
thereby transforming
it into light.
Silverman cites the argument
that Erwin Schrodinger
made, one of the founders
of quantum theory.
He says that the eternal
nature of consciousness
is the answer to the question.
If Schrodinger was correct,
then all sentient beings
must have been one in the
initial singularity which
gave rise to the Big Bang.
This all-together state of
sentience beyond time and space
precedes the state of
separation and limitation
that define a physical universe.
In my view, this state
is the primordial state,
or perfect state, of
the great perfection.
So how do we return there?
Silverman again,
"since separation
is the hallmark
of limit, it would
follow that the exhortation to
love thy neighbor as thyself
is simply a route
map for returning
to our original status."
In his Easter address in
2009, Pope Benedict XVI
said, "Indeed, one of the
questions that most preoccupies
men and women is this:
what is there after death?"
To this mystery,
today's solemnity
allows us to respond
that death does not
have the last word, because life
will be victorious at the end.
This certainty of ours is based
not on simple human reasoning,
but on a historical
fact of faith.
Jesus Christ
crucified and buried
is risen with his glorified
body, his rainbow body.
Jesus has risen so
that we, too, believing
in him may have eternal life.
This proclamation is at the
heart of the gospel message.
And as Saint Paul
vigorously declares,
"If Christ has not been raised,
our preaching is in vain,
and your faith is in vain."
"The resurrection,
then, is not a theory
but a historical reality
revealed by the man
Jesus Christ by means
of his pass over,
his passage, that has opened
a new way between heaven
and earth," said the Pope.
It is neither a myth nor dream.
It is not a vision or a utopia.
It is not a fairy tale.
But it is a singular, a
singularity if you will,
and unrepeatable event.
Jesus of Nazareth, son of
Mary, who at dusk on Friday
was taken down from
the cross and buried,
has victoriously left the tomb.
In fact, at dawn on the
first day after the Sabbath,
Peter and John found
the tomb empty.
Mary Magdalene and
the other women
encountered the risen Jesus.
On the way to Emmaus,
the two disciples
recognized him at the
breaking of the bread.
The risen one appeared
to the Apostles
that evening in the
upper room, and then
to many other
disciples in Galilee.
The Pope concluded
his statement,
saying that by a
new and living way,
he opened through the
curtain that is his body.
To me, the Pope is pointing
us at the secret of arcanum.
He's telling us that
the Shroud of Turin
is in fact an open portal
or gateway into the Heavenly
realms, and that it's in fact
an invitation for us to open
that portal within our
own hearts and our lives.
We conclude with
the words of Jesus
and the Pistis Sophia
when he said, "Cease not
to seek day and
night, and remit not
yourselves until you find
the purifying mysteries that
will purify you, and make
you into a refined light,
so that you will go
on height and inherit
the light of my kingdom."
That is the secret of arcanum.
In Clare's Beyond
the Veil segment,
she'll take us into the
minds of visionary artists
who are inspired by
the Shroud of Turin.
>>CLARE: One may venture to
say that the Shroud of Turin
would have to be on
many people's list
as the top 10 artifacts to
be treasured by the world.
It truly is very
special, indeed.
In 2010, William and I made
a pilgrimage to Turin, Italy,
to experience the Shroud
of Turin personally.
I use the word experience,
because we believe it is real.
We wanted to study
and connect with it,
and we did in a very
powerful and memorable way.
In fact, once encountered,
never forgotten.
We arrived at the chapel
of John the Baptist
and were greeted by a long,
snaking line of fellow pilgrims
in a silent procession
toward the cathedral.
We were very intrigued by
the stations of powerful art
that we passed along the way.
they very clearly gave the
Church's view of the shroud
as an icon of resurrection.
Here we see Christ
carrying the cross,
and encountering Veronica, upon
whose veil the face of Christ
was said to be imprinted.
Along the way, we caught a peek
at the magnificent, spiraling
stupa atop the Shrouded Chapel.
This is the beautiful Sun Gate
symbolism inside this stupa.
The inner sanctum
of the cathedral
where the shroud lies,
when on public display,
captures the essence
of the shroud itself.
As we both sat silently
in front of the shroud
in quiet reflection
on the magnitude
of this priceless and
holy icon of Jesus,
I thought the many
individuals over time
who had encountered
visions of Jesus,
and even painted what they
saw with a clear likeness
to the face on the shroud.
William and I both had visions
of a golden being of light
while sitting in
quiet contemplation
in the seated area right in
front of the shroud itself.
We believe to this day it
was the spirit of Christ.
And this incredible icon
is indeed authentic.
The Bible does not give a
physical description of Jesus.
Why do people believe the
face on the shroud is Jesus?
The answer is the
crown of thorns.
The Bible describes
the mocking of Jesus
before his crucifixion.
Part of this mocking
included the placement
of a crown of
thorns on his head.
This was not done to
other crucifixion victims.
The shroud shows
evidence of wounds
from sharp, spark-like spark--
The shroud shows evidence
of wounds from sharp,
spike-like objects
around the top of his head.
Shroud experts believe
a crown of thorns
is the source of the
blood flows on the head
of the man in the
Shroud of Turin.
Further evidence that the face
on the shroud belongs to Jesus
comes from an examination of
the development of Christian art
portraying Jesus.
This wall painting,
found in 1921
in a house church at
Dura-Europos, Syria,
is the earliest known
representation of Jesus
dating from about 235 AD.
It is now part of the
Dura-Europos collection
at the Yale University
Gallery of Fine Arts, USA.
This third-century fresco
of the Good Shepherd
was found on the ceiling
of the vault of Lucina
in the catacomb of
Callixtus in Rome.
The image of Jesus
as the Good Shepherd
was an especially
popular motive in
the early Christian centuries.
It was based on several
biblical passages,
including the 23rd Psalm
and sayings of Jesus,
and is also an adaption
of a popular pagan image.
These third- to fourth-century
images of Jesus as a magician
are from Roman sarcophagi,
now in the Vatican museum.
This sixth-century mosaic
now in the British Museum
is from Dorset, England.
Jesus still resembles
Apollo or Helios.
After the
sixth-century discovery
of the Shroud of Turin in
Edessa, images of Jesus
became full frontal
facial images
with many of the features
seen on the shroud.
At Ravenna's Sant'appollinare
Nuovo Church,
we find this sixth-century
mosaic of Christ enthroned
as the Heavenly King.
Suddenly in the sixth century,
the features of Christ in art
were brought into focus, as
if by an invisible decree,
says Ian Wilson.
The hair became long and center
parted, the beard established
and forked, the nose
longer and more pronounced,
the eyes deeper,
the pupils larger.
There is an authority
about it that
seems to suggest that
someone, somewhere, suddenly
knew what Jesus had looked like.
If the face on the
shroud inspired this art,
it happened in
the sixth century.
This sixth-century
hammered silver vase
was discovered
among church ruins
at Homs ancient Emesa in Syria.
This is one of the most famous
Christ pantocrator icons.
It is found at St. Catharine's
monastery in the Sinai,
and is believed to
date from about 550 AD.
It is widely thought
to have been sourced
from the image on
the Shroud of Turin.
Interesting observation
of this precious icon
is the symbol on the book
Jesus holds in his left arm.
The symbol is of the Chintamani,
the wish-fulfilling jewel,
within both Hindu and
Buddhist traditions.
It is equivalent to
the Philosopher's Stone
in Western alchemy.
In 1902, Paul Vignon, a French
scholar and early student
of the shroud, identified
several common characteristics
of early artistic
pictures of Jesus.
These characteristics emerged
starting in the sixth century,
about the time
that the shroud was
found hidden high in
a wall of the city.
These are all, to some degree,
found on the Shroud of Turin.
The Vignon markings, as
they have come to be called,
all appear on the shroud as
part of the image of the man--
or as anomalies, in the cloth.
Vignon paid particular attention
to an eight-century Christ
pantocrator, from the catacomb
of Saint Ponteneau, Rome.
It cannot be later than
the eighth century,
because the catacomb was
closed down in 820 AD,
and only reopened in 1852.
On the forehead
between the eyebrows
of this work, a
starkly geometrical,
U shape caught his eye.
He found the same
marking on the shroud.
Vignon found the same U shape,
and the shroud likeness,
in the Christ pantocrator
from the 11th century dome
of the Church of
Daphne near Athens.
Clearly shown are
two wisps of hair
in the center of the forehead,
hair on one side of the head
shorter than on
the other side, a U
shape between the
eyebrows-- often
square-bottomed-- a
downward-pointing triangle or V
on the bridge of the nose, and
one raised eyebrow, large round
eyes accents on both
cheeks somewhat lower
the right cheek, a
forked beard, a gap
in the beard below
the lower lip,
and an enlarged left nostril,
an accent line below the nose,
and a dark line just
below the lower lip.
The theory is that
the Shroud of Turin,
then the Image of Edessa,
was the original inspiration
for various works of
art with these markings.
These images prove
the shroud was
in existence in
the sixth century,
and is not a
12th-century forgery.
Wilson points to this
10th-century example
of the shroud likeness--
the Christ-enthroned fresco
in the Church of Sant'Angelo
in Formis near Capua, Italy.
This late 11th-century
Romanesque fresco
of Christ pantocrator
in Novalesa Abbey
shows the Vignon markings
and the triple dot Chintamani
symbol.
From the 12th century, there
is an excellent example
in the Christ pantocrator
mosaic in the apse of the Norman
Byzantine church
of Cefalu, Sicily.
In 1978, historian
Ian Wilson pointed out
that the pray manuscript
was one of a small number
of 11th to 12th century
deposition scenes.
For example, depictions
of Christ's descent
from the cross--
that was strongly
reminiscent of the Shroud of
Turin in that they depicted
the dead Christ being laid onto
a large, double-length piece
of linen intended to envelop
his body over his head,
with his hands crossed in
front, right hand over the left,
as on the shroud.
This likeness can be
found in the 13th century
mosaic of Christ enthroned
in the gallery of Hagia
Sophia, Constantinople,
and also in the DC mosaic
at Hagia Sophia.
Finally, in the 15th century,
we find one ideal work of art
with which to compare
the shroud image.
This is none other than Jan
Van Eyck and his Rex Regnum.
Although the original
has not survived,
it is known to us
from four copies
that were made at that time.
It has the same rigidly
front-facing aspect
of the shroud face.
Other distinctive features
that match the shroud exactly
include: long hair
parted in the middle
and falling to the shoulders,
moderately long forked
beard, long prominent
nose, thin mustache
drooping to join the beard, a
hairless gap beneath the lower
lip.
As Wilson says,
it might have been
copied from the shroud face.
Did Jan van Eyck have
access to the shroud?
Art experts say
Van Eyck derived it
from Christ
portraits of the East
from Byzantium, in which
artists routinely copied
the same likeness of Christ
from an earlier source.
Might Van Eyck have had a
vision of the man in the shroud?
Van Eyck's painting of
the resurrected Christ
in a halo of rainbow light
is also based on the shroud.
But again, is it possible Van
Eyck saw this face in a vision,
too?
Heinrich Kaufmann
was one such painter,
who captured the image of Jesus
in his many religious works
of art in the late 1800s.
Another artist was Turkish-born
Ariel Pascal Agemian
who studied in Venice throughout
Italy, France, and America.
It was in 1935 that he painted
the well-known "Face of Christ"
based on the negative
of the Shroud of Turin,
receiving accolade
from science experts,
and eventually awarded a gold
medal from Pope Pius XII,
and knighted into the order
of Saint Gregory the Great.
Another visionary
artist alive today
is Nanette Christ,
whose ancestors
were icon painters of the
Eastern Orthodox church.
Nanette's beautiful painting
of Christ is world famous,
and has touched millions
of people in their lives.
She writes about the
extraordinary manifestation
of this beautiful
painting, that she
was directed to paint
from her sacred vision.
It was on the Thursday
before Easter in 1986,
when she had prayed before easel
before beginning a painting.
Suddenly, she experienced
a clear vision
of the presence of Jesus
standing beside the easel
and bathed in very bright light.
Nanette described Jesus'
face with a gentle strength,
beautiful, penetrating gray-blue
eyes, and light auburn hair,
and wearing a pearly-white robe.
His chest was broad.
He was quite tall, she writes,
with a perfect posture.
Nanette was asked by
Jesus to paint his image
in his likeness, so that
everyone who believed in him
and loved him would be
able to look into his eyes
and connect to his soul.
The painting took
Nanette three days,
and she completed
it on Easter Sunday.
The final masterpiece
was authenticated
by the visionaries
of the Catholic
Church and other faiths.
Could the shroud have
been left for mankind
for this very reason, for
man to connect and remember
the message that Jesus left us
all; to live in his footsteps
under the canopy of pure love?
As we have seen,
the shroud has been
a subject of immense
fascination, if not obsession,
with history's greatest
visionary artists.
One can only wonder
how future visionary
artists will portray the shroud.
Will the visionary mind
develop even further
in its spiritual evolution,
as the human race
evolves in the Golden Age?
In 2013, the shroud
went digital.
The Shroud 2.0 app was
authorized by the Turin
archdiocese, and is now
available for downloads
on iTunes.
This allows one to explore
the sheet in detail
through access to an excellent,
high-definition photographic
document that
offers features that
are almost invisible to
the naked eye, elements
that not even the traditional
expositions have ever
allowed to observe.
As sacred visionary
art goes digital,
will this enable people
to connect with the shroud
more directly?
Or will it diminish
the connection?
Time will tell.
>>WILLIAM: I'm William Henry.
Thank you for
watching "Arcanum."
>>CLARE: And I'm Clare Henry.
See you next time.